# Structured Developments

All web developments covered up to this lecture required lots of boilerplate code,
which is error prone and causes a high development overhead.
This created a demand for a more structured development environment, which includes:

* Structure and best practices
* Common patterns for useful abstractions
* Automation of common tasks

Those demands ultimately resulted in entire new frameworks for web development.

## MVC

Model-View-Controller is an architectural pattern applied to web-based services.
It separates the application into three independent components:

* Model
  * Represents data
* View
  * Obtains data from the model in some way
  * Presents data to the user
* Controller
  * Handles user interaction
  * Performs operation on data
  * Controls views, such as activating a new view

The business logic may be located in either the controller or model.
If the logic is combined with the data in the model, operations would still
be invoked by the controller.

MVC can be applied to web applications in multiple ways:

#### Server Side MVC

* All components contained in the server (e.g. CGI script)
* Input request handled by controller
* Response generated by view

Technologies such as Java Servlets assist in extracting the model,
but controller and view would still be tightly coupled.
Java Server Faces provides a generic, configurable controller component
and allow separating the view ("Facelet").
The view can be implemented declaratively as an HTML page containing
references to the model.

Django takes a different approach:
Django separates the tasks in the components view, model and template.
The view handles the request and contains the business logic
(like the controller in other examples).
The template corresponds to the view in the java example:
It is an HTML template which gets instantiated with model data by the view.

### Summary

* MVC allows modularization, and separates design from programming
* Frameworks reduce required boilerplate code by providing common
  components
* Templating for views simplify development
* Modularization leads to improved testability

## Some more structural patterns

### Inversion of Control (IoC)

This principle states that the application code is *reactive*, not active:
it gets called by the framework when relevant events occur, instead
of being the main entrypoint into the application.

### Don't Repeat Yourself

Self explanatory

### Convention Over Configuration

Code, configuration and other aspects such as directory structure should
be derived from convention whenever possible.

### Structured Project Directories

* Frameworks usually have conventions, an it's useful to adhere to them
* Frameworks sometimes provide generation of project scaffolding
  (Django, Ruby on Rails)
